---
published: true
layout: post
title: Alki
category: blog
---

Slip the tank through the straps on the buoyancy compensator, velcro, hard, screw the first stage of the regulator onto the pillar valve, attach the bc hose to the inflator valve, turn the valve, check pressure, breathe once, fill the bc partially, listen, wrestle into the farmer john and jacket, boots, dive knife to the thigh, dive computer strapped to the wrist until circulation gone in finger tips, weight belt secured, 15 pounds on the hips, 15 in the bc, check the threading of the emergency pull, hood on, help in the back, heave the bcd forward, heavy, velcro, clips waist, torso, groin, gloves on, mask and snorkel around the neck, stumble to the water, fins in hand, water drawn up both legs, spit in the goggles, fall over getting the straps of the fins secured, goggles on, regulator in, the hiss of the bcd deflating, water drawn up the back, face already numb, underwater.

<!--more-->

There's only three sounds. The long draught of breath, the rush of bubbles venting from the second stage, and the sharp squeal of your ears equalizing. It's a dampening, not only of auditory, but facial cues as well. Faces are always expressionless, and an eerie washed out gun metal grey from the cold and the wavelengths of the color palette being stripped as depth increases. The only emotion that can be expressed is through crude sign language and the widening of eyes. Out of air? Raise your hand horizontally and slice back and forth.


My oceanography professor pointed to the map of the sea floor in our classroom and said that the 90% of the ocean floor hasn't been charted. It doesn't appear so on the map, there are contours and ridges and sea mounds covering the deep, but much of it is a lie, filler text if you will. Five years ago we hadn't yet observed a giant squid in their natural environment. Using sonar, scientists recently found a school of 20 million fish of the coast of New Jersey in a space the size of Manhattan that had never been observed. Thirty-five years ago, we hadn't yet discovered the ecosystems surrounding hydrothermal vents; today many believe these ecosystems are the basis for all life on earth. All estimates on the number of species the ocean actually contains are mildly educated guesses at best, but at the rate at which scientists discover and catalog marine life, most agree there are hundreds of thousands of species humans have never encountered.

The pylon once was a tree with branches and needles and self-respect to boot. Then it was stripped and sawn, and pounded into the ocean floor as a foundation for a dock or a moor or a pier. And now here it rested, submerged in a foreign environment, drowned. But not lifeless. Dozens and dozens of sea anemones crowed the surface of the trunk, twisting upwards, a stark white, their tentacles drifting with the current. On one of the first dives, I reached outwards just as I had in aquariums my whole life, and poked the nearest bunch of tentacles on a patch of anemones in Cove #1. There are some universal evolutionary flaws built into every Y chromosome: the inability to stand next to a body of water without throwing a rock into it, the inability to sit at a fire without finding an excuse to shift the logs, and the inability to see an animal in the wild and not hunt/catch/poke it. As you touch a sea anemone it retracts into itself as an anti-predatory mechanism, and aside from some species' having neurotoxins, that ability to retract is its only defense. Evolution gives some deadly neurotoxins, others the fetal position, life really is unfair.

First dives are maddeningly terrifying. You are scrambling around for your inflator hose, and releasing or filling your bc with far too much air. You have little idea as to whether you could actually accomplish buddy breathing. Your whole body is in shock with the 45 degree water. You are convinced you'll get the bends as you forget to unload air as you travel uphill. And moreover, you have to trust you won't forget to not hold your breath and have your lungs explode. Twenty feet below the surface, clinging to a rope anchored to the ocean floor, the instructor faces me and motions to remove my mask. With your eyes closed, all you hear is the rush of air in and out, in and out, in and out. You're nothing but those lungs. Then you put it back on, and clear it with a sharp blast of air, and you're off.

Off of Alki there's an old shipwreck called the Honey Bear. It's a wooden sailboat, with an unknown history, but that obviously had trouble floating at some point. The murkiness of the Sound, from the sediment, nutrients and plankton suspended in the water makes visibility around 15ft on a good day. The Honey Bear showed up announced, a hulking wreak, tilted on its side, and the first dive I had to pass right over as my air was running fairly low. The second time however, Mari, our instructor, was adamant I visit the keel of the ship.

This was my ninth dive, the search and recovery dive. As a team we had to navigate to a toilet that somehow finagled its way to the bottom of the ocean at Cove #2. Instead we found a sink, and Mari motioned for us to begin the recovery. I was laying on the sediment, stirring up a massive cloud that made for two or three feet visibility, as I tied the rope to the handle. We secured the line and then Greg begin filling the lift bag with his alternate. Its buoyancy was neutralized, and we carried the sink off to another location, only to be moved again by some future class on a future date. Luckily, we had enough air for a second trip to the ship.

The other divers turned on their lights, and pointed in the direction of the stern. There was maybe a two foot gap, where fish were suspended, unmoving, waiting, sleeping, playing freeze tag. We never see fish static, unless there's a side of tartar sauce, do we. Just past and under the fish there was a tentacle, roughly the diameter of my thigh. If one stretched a measuring tape from the tip of that tentacle to the tip of its reciprocal, you'd have a 15 foot span. The giant pacific octopus had made its home under this old sailing ship, its den. Our lights shown on the head, it's massive hood, and then to the eyes.
