---
published: false
layout: post
title: Útila
category: blog
---

On January 27th I arrived in Útila to start two weeks of dive training at the Útila Dive Center. While there I earned my rescue, deep, wreck, night, and nitrox certifications. I hadn't been diving since my cold water diving days in Seattle, in 45 degree water, with no vis and so the 80 degree, 25m vis conditions were a revelation in the reef surround the island. I wanted to use this post to just jot down some of the key things I learned and some of the experiences I don't want to forget.


- One of the primary takeaways is that my knowledge of theory has in some ways surpassed my physical capabilities in the water. This is freeing in a lot of ways as I know exactly what I need to work on and those things are relatively strightforward. For the next 50 dives need to be focused on 2 primary skills: 1) air consumption 2) bouyancy
- The rescue course demanded the most and in the future I'd love to continue doing unresponsive diver drills every year to refresh my knowledge, with the key components being a) controller ascents using my/their BCDs b) handling swimming, rescue breaths and removing gear simultaneously and c) CPR
- Reviewing RDP, along with nitrox specific calculations should be done frequently. I actually loved that component of the course and it made me really interested in tackling tec dive planning
- I did 5 night dives, and the 2 dark dives we did were straight up incredible. In the first, we came up on this other group of AOWDs and all of their flash lights were